
the sacrificial priests, who heard of the agreeable triumphs of Arjuna in course of his following the horse, became highly gratified. While they were still engaged in discoursing on Arjuna, an envoy came from that high-souled hero bearing a message from him. Repairing to the presence of the Kuru king, the intelligent envoy bowed his head in reverence and informed him of the arrival of that foremost of men, viz., Phalguna. On receipt of this intelligence, tears of joy covered the king's eyes. Large gifts were made to the messenger for the very agreeable tidings he had brought. On the second day from that date, a loud din was heard when that foremost of men, that chief of the Kurus, came. The dust raised by the hoofs of that horse as it walked in close adjacence to Arjuna, looked as beautiful as that raised by the celestial steed Uchchaisravas. And as Arjuna advanced he heard many gladdening words uttered by the citizens. 'By good luck, O Partha, thou art out of danger. Praise to you and king Yudhishthira! Who else than Arjuna could come back after having caused the horse to wander over the whole Earth and after having vanquished all the kings in battle? We have not heard of such a feat having been achieved by even Sagara and other high-souled kings of antiquity. Future kings also will never be able to accomplish so difficult a feat, O foremost one of Kuru's race, as this which thou hast achieved.' Listening to such words, agreeable to the ear, of the citizens, the righteous-souled Phalguna entered the sacrificial compound. Then king Yudhishthira with all his ministers, and Krishna, the delighter of the Yadus, placing Dhritarashtra in their van, went out for receiving Dhananjaya. Saluting the feet of his sire (Dhritarashtra), and then of king Yudhishthira the just of great wisdom, and then worshipping Bhima and others, he embraced Kesava. Worshipped by them all and worshipping them in return according to due rites, the mighty-armed hero, accompanied by those princes, took rest like a ship-wrecked man tossed on the waves resting on reaching the shore. Meanwhile king Vabhruvahan of great wisdom, accompanied by his mothers (Chitrangada and Ulupi), came to the Kuru capital. The mighty-armed prince duly saluted all his seniors of Kuru's race and the other kings present there, and was honoured by them all in return. He then entered the excellent abode of his grand-mother Kunti."'
149:1 It is worthy of note that Draupadi was always styled by Krishna as his sakhi or 'friend'. Krishna was highly chivalrous to the other sex at an age when women were universally regarded as the inferiors of men.

