[paragraph continues] Valadeva, and Satyaki, and Satyaka, each performed the obsequial rites of Abhimanyu. Exceedingly afflicted with grief, they failed to attain comfort. The same was the case with the sons of Pandu in the city called after the elephant. Deprived of Abhimanyu, they failed to obtain peace of mind. The daughter of Virata, O monarch, for many days, totally abstained from all food, exceedingly afflicted by grief on account of the death of her husband. At this all her relatives became plunged into excess of grief. They all feared that the embryo in her womb might be destroyed. Then Vyasa, ascertaining the state of things by his spiritual vision, came there. The highly intelligent Rishi, endued with great energy, arrived (at the palace), addressed Pritha of large eyes, as also Uttara herself, saying,--'Let this grief be abandoned. O famous lady, a son endued with mighty energy will be born to thee, through the puissance of Vasudeva and at my word. That son will rule the Earth after the Pandavas (have departed from it).' Beholding Dhananjaya, he said unto him, in the hearing of king Yudhishthira the just, and gladdening him with his words, 'O Bharata.--'The grandson, O highly blessed one, will become a high-souled prince. He will righteously rule the whole Earth to the verge of the sea. Therefore, O foremost one of Kuru's race, cast off this grief, O mower of foes. Do not doubt this. This will truly happen. That which was uttered by the Vrishni hero on a former occasion, will, without doubt, happen. Do not think otherwise. As regards Abhimanyu, he has gone to the regions of the deities, conquered by him with his own acts. That hero should not be grieved for by thee or, indeed, by the other Kurus.' Thus addressed by his grandsire, Dhananjaya of righteous soul, O king, cast off his grief and even became cheerful. Thy sire, O prince, that art conversant with all duties, began to grow in that womb, O thou of great intelligence, like the Moon in the lighted fortnight. Then Vyasa urged the royal son of Dharma for performing the horse-sacrifice. Having said so, he made himself invisible there and then. The intelligent king Yudhishthira the just, hearing the words of Vyasa, set his mind on the journey for bringing wealth (for the sacrifice).'"

